# Source of data:
UCI machine learning repository: https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/519/heart+failure+clinical+records

# Upload date of data: 2nd April 2020

# Owner of the data:
The original dataset version was collected by Tanvir Ahmad, Assia Munir, Sajjad Haider Bhatti, Muhammad Aftab, and Muhammad Ali Raza in 2015.
Current dataset has slight difference from original dataset in terms of names of columns which was done by D. Chicco and Giuseppe Jurman in their article published on BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making.
Link: https://bmcmedinformdecismak.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12911-020-1023-5#article -info

# Objective of data collection:
Dataset was collected for analysing the survival pattern of heart failure patients who were admitted to Institute of Cardiology and Allied hospital Faisalabad-Pakistan during April-December (2015).
And also rank the features which corresponds to the most important risk factors.

# Analysis of data by other researchers:
D. Chicco and Giuseppe Jurman found in their analysis that serum creatinine and ejection fraction plays a very important role in understanding if a patient will survive after heart failure or not. This discovery has the potential to impact on clinical practice, becoming a new supporting tool for physicians when predicting if a heart failure patient will survive or not.

# Description of data set:
This dataset was collected during April–December 2015.It contains the medical records of 299 heart failure patients collected at the Faisalabad Institute of Cardiology and at the Allied Hospital in Faisalabad (Punjab, Pakistan). The patients consisted of 105 women and 194 men, and their ages range between 40 and 95 years old. All 299 patients had left ventricular systolic dysfunction and had previous heart failures that put them in classes III or IV of New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification of the stages of heart failure. 
The dataset contains 13 features, which report clinical, body, and lifestyle information.

# Description of columns:
Numerical features:
age: age of the patient (years)
creatinine phosphokinase (CPK): level of the CPK enzyme in the blood (mcg/L)
ejection fraction: percentage of blood leaving the heart at each contraction (percentage)
platelets: platelets in the blood (kiloplatelets/mL)
serum creatinine: level of serum creatinine in the blood (mg/dL)
serum sodium: level of serum sodium in the blood (mEq/L)
time: follow-up period (days)

Categorical Features:
anaemia: decrease of red blood cells or hemoglobin (boolean)
high blood pressure: if the patient has hypertension (boolean)
diabetes: if the patient has diabetes (boolean)
sex: woman or man (binary)
smoking: if the patient smokes or not (boolean)

Target Variable:
death event: if the patient deceased during the follow-up period (boolean)

•	The hospital physician considered a patient having anaemia if haematocrit levels were lower than 36%.
•	The creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) states the level of the CPK enzyme in blood. When a muscle tissue gets damaged, CPK flows into the blood. Therefore, high levels of CPK in the blood of a patient might indicate a heart failure or injury. It is measured in microgram per litre (mcg/L).
•	The ejection fraction states the percentage of how much blood the left ventricle pumps out with each contraction.
•	The serum creatinine is a waste product generated by creatine, when a muscle breaks down. Doctors focus on serum creatinine in blood to check kidney function. If a patient has high levels of serum creatinine, it may indicate renal dysfunction. A normal range for serum creatinine is approximately 0.6 to 1.3 milligrams per deciliter(mg/dL) for adult males and 0.5 to 1.2 mg/dL for adult females.
•	The serum sodium test is a routine blood exam that indicates if a patient has normal levels of sodium in the blood. An abnormally low level of sodium(<125 mEq/L) in the blood might be caused by heart failure. mEq/L represents milliequivalents per liter. 
•	The death event feature, that we use as the target in our binary classification study, states if the patient died or survived before the end of the follow-up period, that was 130 days on average.
